# § 1024.2 Definitions.
This version is the current regulation 
  * [ View all versions of this regulation ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/versions/2/)
  * [ Search this regulation ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/search-regulations/results/?regs=1024)


Regulation X 
[ ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/2/)
**(a) Statutory terms.** All terms defined in RESPA (12 U.S.C. 2602) are used in accordance with their statutory meaning unless otherwise defined in paragraph (b) of this section or elsewhere in this part.
**(b) Other terms.** As used in this part:
**Application** means the submission of a borrower's financial information in anticipation of a credit decision relating to a federally related mortgage loan, which shall include the borrower's name, the borrower's monthly income, the borrower's social security number to obtain a credit report, the property address, an estimate of the value of the property, the mortgage loan amount sought, and any other information deemed necessary by the loan originator. An application may either be in writing or electronically submitted, including a written record of an oral application.
**Balloon payment** has the same meaning as “balloon payment” under Regulation Z (12 CFR part 1026).
**Bureau** means the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.
**Business day** means a day on which the offices of the business entity are open to the public for carrying on substantially all of the entity's business functions.
**Changed circumstances** means:
**(1)**
**(i)** Acts of God, war, disaster, or other emergency;
**(ii)** Information particular to the borrower or transaction that was relied on in providing the GFE and that changes or is found to be inaccurate after the GFE has been provided. This may include information about the credit quality of the borrower, the amount of the loan, the estimated value of the property, or any other information that was used in providing the GFE;
**(iii)** New information particular to the borrower or transaction that was not relied on in providing the GFE; or
**(iv)** Other circumstances that are particular to the borrower or transaction, including boundary disputes, the need for flood insurance, or environmental problems.
**(2)** Changed circumstances do not include:
**(i)** The borrower's name, the borrower's monthly income, the property address, an estimate of the value of the property, the mortgage loan amount sought, and any information contained in any credit report obtained by the loan originator prior to providing the GFE, unless the information changes or is found to be inaccurate after the GFE has been provided; or
**(ii)** Market price fluctuations by themselves.
**Dealer** means, in the case of property improvement loans, a seller, contractor, or supplier of goods or services. In the case of manufactured home loans, “dealer” means one who engages in the business of manufactured home retail sales.
**Dealer loan or dealer consumer credit contract** means, generally, any arrangement in which a dealer assists the borrower in obtaining a federally related mortgage loan from the funding lender and then assigns the dealer's legal interests to the funding lender and receives the net proceeds of the loan. The funding lender is the lender for the purposes of the disclosure requirements of this part. If a dealer is a “creditor” as defined under the definition of “federally related mortgage loan” in this part, the dealer is the lender for purposes of this part.
**Effective date of transfer** is defined in section 6(i) (1) of RESPA (12 U.S.C. 2605
**(i) (1)**. In the case of a home equity conversion mortgage or reverse mortgage as referenced in this section, the effective date of transfer is the transfer date agreed upon by the transferee servicer and the transferor servicer.
**Federally related mortgage loan** means:
**(1)** Any loan (other than temporary financing, such as a construction loan):
**(i)** That is secured by a first or subordinate lien on residential real property, including a refinancing of any secured loan on residential real property, upon which there is either:
**(A)** Located or, following settlement, will be constructed using proceeds of the loan, a structure or structures designed principally for occupancy of from one to four families (including individual units of condominiums and cooperatives and including any related interests, such as a share in the cooperative or right to occupancy of the unit); or
**(B)** Located or, following settlement, will be placed using proceeds of the loan, a manufactured home; and
**(ii)** For which one of the following paragraphs applies. The loan:
**(A)** Is made in whole or in part by any lender that is either regulated by or whose deposits or accounts are insured by any agency of the Federal Government;
**(B)** Is made in whole or in part, or is insured, guaranteed, supplemented, or assisted in any way:
**(1)** By the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or any other officer or agency of the Federal Government; or
**(2)** Under or in connection with a housing or urban development program administered by the Secretary of HUD or a housing or related program administered by any other officer or agency of the Federal Government;
**(C)** Is intended to be sold by the originating lender to the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Government National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (or its successors), or a financial institution from which the loan is to be purchased by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (or its successors);
**(D)** Is made in whole or in part by a “creditor,” as defined in section 103(g) of the Consumer Credit Protection Act (15 U.S.C. 1602(g)), that makes or invests in residential real estate loans aggregating more than $1,000,000 per year. For purposes of this definition, the term “creditor” does not include any agency or instrumentality of any State, and the term “residential real estate loan” means any loan secured by residential real property, including single-family and multifamily residential property;
**(E)** Is originated either by a dealer or, if the obligation is to be assigned to any maker of mortgage loans specified in paragraphs (1)(ii)(A) through (D) of this definition, by a mortgage broker; or
**(F)** Is the subject of a home equity conversion mortgage, also frequently called a “reverse mortgage,” issued by any maker of mortgage loans specified in paragraphs (1)(ii)(A) through (D) of this definition.
**(2)** Any installment sales contract, land contract, or contract for deed on otherwise qualifying residential property is a federally related mortgage loan if the contract is funded in whole or in part by proceeds of a loan made by any maker of mortgage loans specified in paragraphs (1)(ii) (A) through (D) of this definition.
**(3)** If the residential real property securing a mortgage loan is not located in a State, the loan is not a federally related mortgage loan.
**Good faith estimate** or _GFE_ means an estimate of settlement charges a borrower is likely to incur, as a dollar amount, and related loan information, based upon common practice and experience in the locality of the mortgaged property, as provided on the form prescribed in § [1024.7](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/7/) and prepared in accordance with the Instructions in appendix C to this part.
**HUD** means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
**HUD-1 or HUD-1A settlement statement** (also _HUD-1 or HUD-1A_) means the statement that is prescribed in this part for setting forth settlement charges in connection with either the purchase or the refinancing (or other subordinate lien transaction) of 1- to 4-family residential property.
**Lender** means, generally, the secured creditor or creditors named in the debt obligation and document creating the lien. For loans originated by a mortgage broker that closes a federally related mortgage loan in its own name in a table funding transaction, the lender is the person to whom the obligation is initially assigned at or after settlement. A lender, in connection with dealer loans, is the lender to whom the loan is assigned, unless the dealer meets the definition of creditor as defined under “federally related mortgage loan” in this section. See also § [1024.5(b)(7),](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/5/#b-7) secondary market transactions.
**Loan originator** means a lender or mortgage broker.
**Manufactured home** is defined in HUD regulation 24 CFR 3280.2.
**Mortgage broker** means a person (other than an employee of a lender) that renders origination services and serves as an intermediary between a borrower and a lender in a transaction involving a federally related mortgage loan, including such a person that closes the loan in its own name in a table-funded transaction.
**Mortgaged property** means the real property that is security for the federally related mortgage loan.
**Origination service** means any service involved in the creation of a federally related mortgage loan, including but not limited to the taking of the loan application, loan processing, the underwriting and funding of the loan, and the processing and administrative services required to perform these functions.
**Person** is defined in section 3(5) of RESPA (12 U.S.C. 2602(5)).
**Prepayment penalty** has the same meaning as “prepayment penalty” under Regulation Z (12 CFR part 1026).
**Public Guidance Documents** means Federal Register documents adopted or published, that the Bureau may amend from time-to-time by publication in the Federal Register. These documents are also available from the Bureau. Requests for copies of Public Guidance Documents should be directed to the Assistant Director, Office of Regulations, Division of Research, Monitoring, and Regulations, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, 1700 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552.
**Refinancing** means a transaction in which an existing obligation that was subject to a secured lien on residential real property is satisfied and replaced by a new obligation undertaken by the same borrower and with the same or a new lender. The following shall not be treated as a refinancing, even when the existing obligation is satisfied and replaced by a new obligation with the same lender (this definition of “refinancing” as to transactions with the same lender is similar to Regulation Z, 12 CFR [1026.20(a)):](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/20/#a)
**(1)** A renewal of a single payment obligation with no change in the original terms;
**(2)** A reduction in the annual percentage rate as computed under the Truth in Lending Act with a corresponding change in the payment schedule;
**(3)** An agreement involving a court proceeding;
**(4)** A workout agreement, in which a change in the payment schedule or change in collateral requirements is agreed to as a result of the consumer's default or delinquency, unless the rate is increased or the new amount financed exceeds the unpaid balance plus earned finance charges and premiums for continuation of allowable insurance; and
**(5)** The renewal of optional insurance purchased by the consumer that is added to an existing transaction, if disclosures relating to the initial purchase were provided.
**Regulation Z** means the regulations issued by the Bureau (12 CFR part 1026) to implement the Federal Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. 1601 _et seq._), and includes the Commentary on Regulation Z.
**Required use** means a situation in which a person must use a particular provider of a settlement service in order to have access to some distinct service or property, and the person will pay for the settlement service of the particular provider or will pay a charge attributable, in whole or in part, to the settlement service. However, the offering of a package (or combination of settlement services) or the offering of discounts or rebates to consumers for the purchase of multiple settlement services does not constitute a required use. Any package or discount must be optional to the purchaser. The discount must be a true discount below the prices that are otherwise generally available, and must not be made up by higher costs elsewhere in the settlement process.
**RESPA** means the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 U.S.C. 2601 _et seq._).
**Servicer** means a person responsible for the servicing of a federally related mortgage loan (including the person who makes or holds such loan if such person also services the loan). The term does not include:
**(1)** The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), in connection with assets acquired, assigned, sold, or transferred pursuant to section 13(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act or as receiver or conservator of an insured depository institution;
**(2)** The National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), in connection with assets acquired, assigned, sold, or transferred pursuant to section 208 of the Federal Credit Union Act or as conservator or liquidating agent of an insured credit union; and
**(3)** The Federal National Mortgage Corporation (FNMA); the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac); the FDIC; HUD, including the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA) and the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) (including cases in which a mortgage insured under the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1701 _et seq._) is assigned to HUD); the NCUA; the Farm Service Agency; and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), in any case in which the assignment, sale, or transfer of the servicing of the federally related mortgage loan is preceded by termination of the contract for servicing the loan for cause, commencement of proceedings for bankruptcy of the servicer, commencement of proceedings by the FDIC for conservatorship or receivership of the servicer (or an entity by which the servicer is owned or controlled), or commencement of proceedings by the NCUA for appointment of a conservator or liquidating agent of the servicer (or an entity by which the servicer is owned or controlled).
**Servicing** means receiving any scheduled periodic payments from a borrower pursuant to the terms of any federally related mortgage loan, including amounts for escrow accounts under section 10 of RESPA (12 U.S.C. 2609), and making the payments to the owner of the loan or other third parties of principal and interest and such other payments with respect to the amounts received from the borrower as may be required pursuant to the terms of the mortgage servicing loan documents or servicing contract. In the case of a home equity conversion mortgage or reverse mortgage as referenced in this section, servicing includes making payments to the borrower.
**Settlement** means the process of executing legally binding documents regarding a lien on property that is subject to a federally related mortgage loan. This process may also be called “closing” or “escrow” in different jurisdictions.
**Settlement service** means any service provided in connection with a prospective or actual settlement, including, but not limited to, any one or more of the following:
**(1)** Origination of a federally related mortgage loan (including, but not limited to, the taking of loan applications, loan processing, and the underwriting and funding of such loans);
**(2)** Rendering of services by a mortgage broker (including counseling, taking of applications, obtaining verifications and appraisals, and other loan processing and origination services, and communicating with the borrower and lender);
**(3)** Provision of any services related to the origination, processing or funding of a federally related mortgage loan;
**(4)** Provision of title services, including title searches, title examinations, abstract preparation, insurability determinations, and the issuance of title commitments and title insurance policies;
**(5)** Rendering of services by an attorney;
**(6)** Preparation of documents, including notarization, delivery, and recordation;
**(7)** Rendering of credit reports and appraisals;
**(8)** Rendering of inspections, including inspections required by applicable law or any inspections required by the sales contract or mortgage documents prior to transfer of title;
**(9)** Conducting of settlement by a settlement agent and any related services;
**(10)** Provision of services involving mortgage insurance;
**(11)** Provision of services involving hazard, flood, or other casualty insurance or homeowner's warranties;
**(12)** Provision of services involving mortgage life, disability, or similar insurance designed to pay a mortgage loan upon disability or death of a borrower, but only if such insurance is required by the lender as a condition of the loan;
**(13)** Provision of services involving real property taxes or any other assessments or charges on the real property;
**(14)** Rendering of services by a real estate agent or real estate broker; and
**(15)** Provision of any other services for which a settlement service provider requires a borrower or seller to pay.
**Special information booklet** means the booklet adopted pursuant to section 5 of RESPA (12 U.S.C. 2604) to help persons understand the nature and costs of settlement services. The Bureau publishes the form of the special information booklet in the Federal Register or by other public notice. The Bureau may issue or approve additional booklets or alternative booklets by publication of a Notice in the Federal Register.
**State** means any state of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any territory or possession of the United States.
**Table funding** means a settlement at which a loan is funded by a contemporaneous advance of loan funds and an assignment of the loan to the person advancing the funds. A table-funded transaction is not a secondary market transaction (see § [1024.5(b)(7)).](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/5/#b-7)
**Third party** means a settlement service provider other than a loan originator.
**Title company** means any institution, or its duly authorized agent, that is qualified to issue title insurance.
**Title service** means any service involved in the provision of title insurance (lender's or owner's policy), including but not limited to: Title examination and evaluation; preparation and issuance of title commitment; clearance of underwriting objections; preparation and issuance of a title insurance policy or policies; and the processing and administrative services required to perform these functions. The term also includes the service of conducting a settlement.
**Tolerance** means the maximum amount by which the charge for a category or categories of settlement costs may exceed the amount of the estimate for such category or categories on a GFE.
  * [ Previous section - § 1024.1 ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/1/) § 1024.1 Designation.
  * [ Next section - § 1024.3 ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/3/) § 1024.3 E-Sign applicability.