# § 1026.41 Periodic statements for residential mortgage loans.
This version is the current regulation 
  * [ View all versions of this regulation ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/versions/41/)
  * [ Search this regulation ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/search-regulations/results/?regs=1026)


Regulation Z 
[ ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/41/)
**(a) In general** —
Official interpretation of 41(a) In general. 
1. **Recipient of periodic statement.** When two consumers are joint obligors with primary liability on a closed-end consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling subject to § 1026.41, the periodic statement may be sent to either one of them. For example, if spouses jointly own a home, the servicer need not send statements to both spouses; a single statement may be sent.
2. **Billing cycles shorter than a 31-day period.** If a loan has a billing cycle shorter than a period of 31 days (for example, a bi-weekly billing cycle), a periodic statement covering an entire month may be used. Such statement would separately list the upcoming payment due dates and amounts due, as required by § 1026.20(d)(1), and list all transaction activity that occurred during the related time period, as required by paragraph (d)(4). Such statement may aggregate the information for the explanation of amount due, as required by paragraph (d)(2), and past payment breakdown, as required by paragraph (d)(3).
3. **One statement per billing cycle.** The periodic statement requirement in § 1026.41 applies to the “creditor, assignee, or servicer as applicable.” The creditor, assignee, and servicer are all subject to this requirement (_but see_ comment 41(a)-4), but only one statement must be sent to the consumer each billing cycle. When two or more parties are subject to this requirement, they may decide among themselves which of them will send the statement.
4. **Opting out.** A consumer may not opt out of receiving periodic statements altogether. However, consumers who have demonstrated the ability to access statements online may opt out of receiving notifications that statements are available. Such an ability may be demonstrated, for example, by the consumer receiving notification that the statements is available, going to the Web site where the information is available, viewing the information about their account and selecting a link or option there to indicate they no longer would like to receive notifications when new statements are available.
[See interpretation of 41(a) In general. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-a-Interp)
**(1) Scope.** This section applies to a closed-end consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling, unless an exemption in paragraph (e) of this section applies. A closed-end consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling is referred to as a _mortgage loan_ for purposes of this section.
**(2) Periodic statements.** A servicer of a transaction subject to this section shall provide the consumer, for each billing cycle, a periodic statement meeting the requirements of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section. If a mortgage loan has a billing cycle shorter than a period of 31 days (for example, a bi-weekly billing cycle), a periodic statement covering an entire month may be used. For the purposes of this section, _servicer_ includes the creditor, assignee, or servicer, as applicable. A creditor or assignee that does not currently own the mortgage loan or the mortgage servicing rights is not subject to the requirement in this section to provide a periodic statement.
**(b) Timing of the periodic statement.** The periodic statement must be delivered or placed in the mail within a reasonably prompt time after the payment due date or the end of any courtesy period provided for the previous billing cycle.
Official interpretation of 41(b) Timing of the periodic statement. 
1. **Reasonably prompt time.** Section 1026.41(b) requires that the periodic statement be delivered or placed in the mail no later than a reasonably prompt time after the payment due date or the end of any courtesy period. Delivering, emailing or placing the periodic statement in the mail within four days of the close of the courtesy period of the previous billing cycle generally would be considered reasonably prompt.
2. **Courtesy period.** The meaning of “courtesy period” is explained in comment 7(b)(11)-1.
[See interpretation of 41(b) Timing of the periodic statement. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-b-Interp)
**(c) Form of the periodic statement.** The servicer must make the disclosures required by this section clearly and conspicuously in writing, or electronically if the consumer agrees, and in a form that the consumer may keep. Sample forms for periodic statements are provided in appendix H-30. Proper use of these forms complies with the requirements of this paragraph (c) and the layout requirements in paragraph (d) of this section.
Official interpretation of 41(c) Form of the periodic statement. 
1. **Clear and conspicuous standard.** The “clear and conspicuous” standard generally requires that disclosures be in a reasonably understandable form. Except where otherwise provided, the standard does not prohibit adding to the required disclosures, as long as the additional information does not overwhelm or obscure the required disclosures. For example, while certain information about the escrow account (such as the account balance) is not required on the periodic statement, this information may be included.
2. **Additional information; disclosures required by other laws.** Nothing in § 1026.41 prohibits a servicer from including additional information or combining disclosures required by other laws with the disclosures required by this subpart, unless such prohibition is expressly set forth in this subpart, or other applicable law.
3. **Electronic distribution.** The periodic statement may be provided electronically if the consumer agrees. The consumer must give affirmative consent to receive statements electronically. If statements are provided electronically, the creditor, assignee, or servicer may send a notification that a consumer's statement is available, with a link to where the statement can be accessed, in place of the statement itself.
4. **Presumed consent.** Any consumer who is currently receiving disclosures for any account (for example, a mortgage or checking account) electronically from their servicer shall be deemed to have consented to receiving e-statements in place of paper statements.
5. **Permissible changes.** Servicers may modify the sample forms for periodic statements provided in appendix H-30 of this part to remove language that could suggest liability under the mortgage loan agreement if such language is not applicable. For example, in the case of a confirmed successor in interest who has not assumed the mortgage loan obligation under State law and is not otherwise liable on the mortgage loan obligation, a servicer may modify the forms to:
i. Use “this mortgage” or “the mortgage” instead of “your mortgage.”
ii. Use “The payments on this mortgage are late” instead of “You are late on your mortgage payments.”
iii. Use “This is the amount needed to bring the loan current” instead of “You must pay this amount to bring your loan current.”
[See interpretation of 41(c) Form of the periodic statement. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-c-Interp)
**(d) Content and layout of the periodic statement.** The periodic statement required by this section shall include:
Official interpretation of 41(d) Content and layout of the periodic statement. 
1. **Close proximity.** Section 1026.41(d) requires several disclosures to be provided in close proximity to one another. To meet this requirement, the items to be provided in close proximity must be grouped together, and set off from other groupings of items. This may be accomplished in a variety of ways, for example, by presenting the information in boxes, or by arranging the items on the document and including spacing between the groupings. Items in close proximity may not have any unrelated text between them. Text is unrelated if it does not explain or expand upon the required disclosures.
2. **Not applicable.** If an item required by paragraph (d) or (e) of this section is not applicable to the loan, it may be omitted from the periodic statement or coupon book. For example, if there is no prepayment penalty associated with a loan, the prepayment penalty disclosures need not be provided on the periodic statement.
3. **Terminology.** A servicer may use terminology other than that found on the sample periodic statements in appendix H-30, so long as the new terminology is commonly understood. For example, servicers may take into consideration regional differences in terminology and refer to the account for the collection of taxes and insurance, referred to in § 1026.41(d) as the “escrow account,” as an “impound account.”
4. **Temporary loss mitigation programs.** If the consumer has agreed to a temporary loss mitigation program, the disclosures required by § 1026.41(d)(2), (3), and (5) regarding how payments were and will be applied must identify how payments are applied according to the loan contract, regardless of the temporary loss mitigation program.
5. **First statement after exemption terminates.** Section 1026.41(d)(2)(ii), (d)(3)(i), and (d)(4) requires the disclosure of the total sum of any fees or charges imposed since the last statement, the total of all payments received since the last statement, including a breakdown of how payments were applied, and a list of all transaction activity since the last statement. For purposes of the first periodic statement provided to the consumer following termination of an exemption under § 1026.41(e), the disclosures required by § 1026.41(d)(2)(ii), (d)(3)(i), and (d)(4) may be limited to account activity since the last payment due date that occurred while the exemption was in effect. For example, if mortgage loan payments are due on the first of each month and the servicer's exemption under § 1026.41(e) terminated on January 15, the first statement provided to the consumer after January 15 may be limited to the total sum of any fees or charges imposed, the total of all payments received, a breakdown of how the payments were applied, and a list of all transaction activity since January 1.
[See interpretation of 41(d) Content and layout of the periodic statement. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-d-Interp)
**(1) Amount due.** Grouped together in close proximity to each other and located at the top of the first page of the statement:
Official interpretation of 41(d)(1) Amount due. 
1. **Acceleration.** If the balance of a mortgage loan has been accelerated but the servicer will accept a lesser amount to reinstate the loan, the amount due under § 1026.41(d)(1) must identify only the lesser amount that will be accepted to reinstate the loan. The periodic statement must be accurate when provided and should indicate, if applicable, that the amount due is accurate only for a specified period of time. For example, the statement may include language such as “as of [date]” or “good through [date]” and provide an amount due that will reinstate the loan as of that date or good through that date, respectively.
2. **Temporary loss mitigation programs.** If the consumer has agreed to a temporary loss mitigation program, the amount due under § 1026.41(d)(1) may identify either the payment due under the temporary loss mitigation program or the amount due according to the loan contract.
3. **Permanent loan modifications.** If the loan contract has been permanently modified, the amount due under § 1026.41(d)(1) must identify only the amount due under the modified loan contract.
[See interpretation of 41(d)(1) Amount due. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-d-1-Interp)
**(i)** The payment due date;
**(ii)** The amount of any late payment fee, and the date on which that fee will be imposed if payment has not been received; and
**(iii)** The amount due, shown more prominently than other disclosures on the page and, if the transaction has multiple payment options, the amount due under each of the payment options.
**(2) Explanation of amount due.** The following items, grouped together in close proximity to each other and located on the first page of the statement:
Official interpretation of 41(d)(2) Explanation of amount due. 
1. **Acceleration.** If the balance of a mortgage loan has been accelerated but the servicer will accept a lesser amount to reinstate the loan, the explanation of amount due under § 1026.41(d)(2) must list both the reinstatement amount that is disclosed as the amount due and the accelerated amount but not the monthly payment amount that would otherwise be required under § 1026.41(d)(2)(i). The periodic statement must also include an explanation that the reinstatement amount will be accepted to reinstate the loan through the “as of [date]” or “good through [date],” as applicable, along with any special instructions for submitting the payment. The explanation should be on the front page of the statement or, alternatively, may be included on a separate page enclosed with the periodic statement. The explanation may include related information, such as a statement that the amount disclosed is “not a payoff amount.”
2. **Temporary loss mitigation programs.** If the consumer has agreed to a temporary loss mitigation program and the amount due identifies the payment due under the temporary loss mitigation program, the explanation of amount due under § 1026.41(d)(2) must include both the amount due according to the loan contract and the payment due under the temporary loss mitigation program. The statement must also include an explanation that the amount due is being disclosed as a different amount because of the temporary loss mitigation program. The explanation should be on the front page of the statement or, alternatively, may be included on a separate page enclosed with the periodic statement or in a separate letter.
[See interpretation of 41(d)(2) Explanation of amount due. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-d-2-Interp)
**(i)** The monthly payment amount, including a breakdown showing how much, if any, will be applied to principal, interest, and escrow and, if a mortgage loan has multiple payment options, a breakdown of each of the payment options along with information on whether the principal balance will increase, decrease, or stay the same for each option listed;
**(ii)** The total sum of any fees or charges imposed since the last statement; and
**(iii)** Any payment amount past due.
**(3) Past Payment Breakdown.** The following items, grouped together in close proximity to each other and located on the first page of the statement:
Official interpretation of 41(d)(3) Past payment breakdown. 
1. **Partial payments.** The disclosure of any partial payments received since the previous statement that were sent to a suspense or unapplied funds account as required by § 1026.41(d)(3)(i) should reflect any funds that were received in the time period covered by the current statement and that were placed in such account. The disclosure of any portion of payments since the beginning of the calendar year that was sent to a partial payment or suspense account as required by § 1026.41(d)(3)(ii) should reflect all funds that are currently held in a suspense or unapplied funds account. For example:
i. Suppose a payment of $1,000 is due, but the consumer sends in only $600 on January 1, which is held in a suspense account. Further assume there are no fees charged on this account. Assuming there are no other funds in the suspense account, the January statement should reflect: Unapplied funds since last statement - $600. Unapplied funds YTD - $600.
ii. Assume the same facts as in the preceding paragraph, except that during February the consumer sends in $300 and this too is held in the suspense account. The statement should reflect: Unapplied funds since last statement - $300. Unapplied funds YTD - $900.
iii. Assume the same facts as in the preceding paragraph, except that during March the consumer sends in $400. Of this payment, $100 completes a full periodic payment when added to the $900 in funds already held in the suspense account. This $1,000 is applied to the January payment, and the remaining $300 remains in the suspense account. The statement should reflect: Unapplied funds since last statement - $300. Unapplied Funds YTD - $300.
[See interpretation of 41(d)(3) Past payment breakdown. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-d-3-Interp)
**(i)** The total of all payments received since the last statement, including a breakdown showing the amount, if any, that was applied to principal, interest, escrow, fees and charges, and the amount, if any, sent to any suspense or unapplied funds account; and
**(ii)** The total of all payments received since the beginning of the current calendar year, including a breakdown of that total showing the amount, if any, that was applied to principal, interest, escrow, fees and charges, and the amount, if any, currently held in any suspense or unapplied funds account.
**(4) Transaction activity.** A list of all the transaction activity that occurred since the last statement. For purposes of this paragraph (d)(4), _transaction activity_ means any activity that causes a credit or debit to the amount currently due. This list must include the date of the transaction, a brief description of the transaction, and the amount of the transaction for each activity on the list.
Official interpretation of 41(d)(4) Transaction Activity. 
1. **Meaning.** Transaction activity includes any transaction that credits or debits the amount currently due. This is the same amount that is required to be disclosed under § 1026.41(d)(1)(iii). Examples of such transactions include, without limitation:
i. Payments received and applied;
ii. Payments received and held in a suspense account;
iii. The imposition of any fees (for example late fees); and
iv. The imposition of any charges (for example, private mortgage insurance).
2. **Description of late fees.** The description of any late fee charges includes the date of the late fee, the amount of the late fee, and the fact that a late fee was imposed.
3. **Partial payments.** If a partial payment is sent to a suspense or unapplied funds account, this fact must be in the transaction description along with the date and amount of the payment.
[See interpretation of 41(d)(4) Transaction Activity. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-d-4-Interp)
**(5) Partial payment information.** If a statement reflects a partial payment that was placed in a suspense or unapplied funds account, information explaining what must be done for the funds to be applied. The information must be on the front page of the statement or, alternatively, may be included on a separate page enclosed with the periodic statement or in a separate letter.
**(6) Contact information.** A toll-free telephone number and, if applicable, an electronic mailing address that may be used by the consumer to obtain information about the consumer's account, located on the front page of the statement.
**(7) Account information.** The following information:
**(i)** The amount of the outstanding principal balance;
**(ii)** The current interest rate in effect for the mortgage loan;
**(iii)** The date after which the interest rate may next change;
**(iv)** The existence of any prepayment penalty, as defined in § [1026.32(b)(6)(i),](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/32/#b-6-i) that may be charged;
**(v)** The Web site to access either the Bureau list or the HUD list of homeownership counselors and counseling organizations and the HUD toll-free telephone number to access contact information for homeownership counselors or counseling organizations; and
**(8) Delinquency information.** If the consumer is more than 45 days delinquent, the following items, grouped together in close proximity to each other and located on the first page of the statement or, alternatively, on a separate page enclosed with the periodic statement or in a separate letter:
Official interpretation of 41(d)(8) Delinquency information. 
1. **Length of delinquency.** For purposes of § 1026.41(d)(8), the length of a consumer's delinquency is measured as of the date of the periodic statement or the date of the written notice provided under § 1026.41(e)(3)(iv). A consumer's delinquency begins on the date an amount sufficient to cover a periodic payment of principal, interest, and escrow, if applicable, becomes due and unpaid, even if the consumer is afforded a period after the due date to pay before the servicer assesses a late fee. A consumer is delinquent if one or more periodic payments of principal, interest, and escrow, if applicable, are due and unpaid.
2. **Application of funds.** For purposes of § 1026.41(d)(8), if a servicer applies payments to the oldest outstanding periodic payment, a payment by a delinquent consumer advances the date the consumer's delinquency began. For example, assume a mortgage loan obligation under which a consumer's periodic payment is due on the first of each month. A consumer fails to make a payment on January 1 but makes a periodic payment on February 3. The servicer applies the payment received on February 3 to the outstanding January payment. On February 4, the consumer is three days delinquent, and the next periodic statement should disclose the length of the consumer's delinquency using February 2 as the first day of delinquency.
[See interpretation of 41(d)(8) Delinquency information. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-d-8-Interp)
**(i)** The length of the consumer's delinquency;
**(ii)** A notification of possible risks, such as foreclosure, and expenses, that may be incurred if the delinquency is not cured;
**(iii)** An account history showing, for the previous six months or the period since the last time the account was current, whichever is shorter, the amount remaining past due from each billing cycle or, if any such payment was fully paid, the date on which it was credited as fully paid;
**(iv)** A notice indicating any loss mitigation program to which the consumer has agreed, if applicable;
**(v)** A notice of whether the servicer has made the first notice or filing required by applicable law for any judicial or non-judicial foreclosure process, if applicable;
**(vi)** The total payment amount needed to bring the account current; and
**(vii)** A reference to the homeownership counselor information disclosed pursuant to paragraph (d)(7)(v) of this section.
**(e) Exemptions** —
Official interpretation of 41(e) Exemptions. 
[See interpretation of 41(e) Exemptions. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-Interp)
**(1) Reverse mortgages.** Reverse mortgage transactions, as defined by § [1026.33(a),](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/33/#a) are exempt from the requirements of this section.
**(2) Timeshare plans.** Transactions secured by consumers' interests in timeshare plans, as defined by 11 U.S.C. 101(53D), are exempt from the requirements of this section.
**(3) Coupon books.** The requirements of paragraph (a) of this section do not apply to fixed-rate loans if the servicer:
Official interpretation of 41(e)(3) Coupon book exemption. 
1. **Fixed rate.** For guidance on the meaning of “fixed rate” for purposes of § 1026.41(e)(3), see § 1026.18(s)(7)(iii) and its commentary.
2. **Coupon book.** A coupon book is a booklet provided to the consumer with a page for each billing cycle during a set period of time (often covering one year). These pages are designed to be torn off and returned to the servicer with a payment for each billing cycle. Additional information about the loan is often included on or inside the front or back cover, or on filler pages in the coupon book.
3. **Information location.** The information required by paragraph (e)(3)(ii) need not be provided on each coupon, but should be provided somewhere in the coupon book. Such information could be located, e.g., on or inside the front or back cover, or on filler pages in the coupon book.
4. **Outstanding principal balance.** Paragraph (e)(3)(ii)(A) requires the information listed in paragraph (d)(7) to be included in the coupon book. Paragraph (d)(7)(i) requires the disclosure of the outstanding principal balance. If the servicer makes use of a coupon book and the exemption in § 1026.41(e)(3), the servicer need only disclose the principal balance at the beginning of the time period covered by the coupon book.
[See interpretation of 41(e)(3) Coupon book exemption. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-3-Interp)
**(i)** Provides the consumer with a coupon book that includes on each coupon the information listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section;
**(ii)** Provides the consumer with a coupon book that includes anywhere in the coupon book:
**(A)** The account information listed in paragraph (d)(7) of this section;
**(B)** The contact information for the servicer, listed in paragraph (d)(6) of this section; and
**(C)** Information on how the consumer can obtain the information listed in paragraph (e)(3)(iii) of this section;
**(iii)** Makes available upon request to the consumer by telephone, in writing, in person, or electronically, if the consumer consents, the information listed in paragraph (d)(2) through (5) of this section; and
**(iv)** Provides the consumer the information listed in paragraph (d)(8) of this section in writing, for any billing cycle during which the consumer is more than 45 days delinquent.
**(4) Small servicers** —
Official interpretation of 41(e)(4) Small servicers. 
[See interpretation of 41(e)(4) Small servicers. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-4-Interp)
**(i) Exemption.** A creditor, assignee, or servicer is exempt from the requirements of this section for mortgage loans serviced by a small servicer.
**(ii) Small servicer defined.** A small servicer is a servicer that:
Official interpretation of 41(e)(4)(ii) Small servicer defined. 
1. **Mortgage loans considered.** Pursuant to § 1026.41(a)(1), the mortgage loans considered in determining status as a small servicer are closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling, subject to the exclusions in § 1026.41(e)(4)(iii).
2. **Services, together with affiliates, 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans.** To qualify as a small servicer, under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(A), a servicer must service, together with any affiliates, 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, for all of which the servicer (or an affiliate) is the creditor or assignee. There are two elements to satisfying § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(A). First, a servicer, together with any affiliates, must service 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans. Second, a servicer must service only mortgage loans for which the servicer (or an affiliate) is the creditor or assignee. To be the creditor or assignee of a mortgage loan, the servicer (or an affiliate) must either currently own the mortgage loan or must have been the entity to which the mortgage loan obligation was initially payable (that is, the originator of the mortgage loan). A servicer is not a small servicer under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(A) if it services any mortgage loans for which the servicer or an affiliate is not the creditor or assignee (that is, for which the servicer or an affiliate is not the owner or was not the originator). The following two examples demonstrate circumstances in which a servicer would not qualify as a small servicer under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(A) because it did not meet both requirements under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(A) for determining a servicer's status as a small servicer:
i. A servicer services 3,000 mortgage loans, all of which it or an affiliate owns or originated. An affiliate of the servicer services 4,000 other mortgage loans, all of which it or an affiliate owns or originated. Because the number of mortgage loans serviced by a servicer is determined by counting the mortgage loans serviced by a servicer together with any affiliates, both of these servicers are considered to be servicing 7,000 mortgage loans and neither servicer is a small servicer.
ii. A service services 3,100 mortgage loans - 3,000 mortgage loans it owns or originated and 100 mortgage loans it neither owns nor originated, but for which it owns the mortgage servicing rights. The servicer is not a small servicer because it services mortgage loans for which the servicer (or an affiliate) is not the creditor or assignee, notwithstanding that the servicer services fewer than 5,000 mortgage loans.
3. **Master servicing and subservicing.** A servicer that qualifies as a small servicer does not lose its small servicer status if it retains a subservicer, as that term is defined in 12 CFR 1024.31, to service any of its mortgage loans. A subservicer can gain the benefit of the small servicer exemption only if (1) the master servicer, as that term is defined in 12 CFR 1024.31, is a small servicer and (2) the subservicer is a small servicer. A subservicer generally will not qualify as a small servicer because it does not own or did not originate the mortgage loans it subservices - unless it is an affiliate of a master servicer that qualifies as a small servicer. The following examples demonstrate the application of the small servicer exemption for different forms of servicing relationships:
i. A credit union services 4,000 mortgage loans, all of which it originated or owns. The credit union retains a credit union service organization, that is not an affiliate, to subservice 1,000 of the mortgage loans. The credit union is a small servicer and, thus, can gain the benefit of the small servicer exemption for the 3,000 mortgage loans the credit union services itself. The credit union service organization is not a small servicer because it services mortgage loans it does not own or did not originate. Accordingly, the credit union service organization does not gain the benefit of the small servicer exemption and, thus, must comply with any applicable mortgage servicing requirements for the 1,000 mortgage loans it subservices.
ii. A bank holding company, through a lender subsidiary, owns or originated 4,000 mortgage loans. All mortgage servicing rights for the 4,000 mortgage loans are owned by a wholly owned master servicer subsidiary. Servicing for the 4,000 mortgage loans is conducted by a wholly owned subservicer subsidiary. The bank holding company controls all of these subsidiaries and, thus, they are affiliates of the bank holding company pursuant 12 CFR 1026.32(b)(2). Because the master servicer and subservicer service 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, and because all the mortgage loans are owned or originated by an affiliate, the master servicer and the subservicer both qualify for the small servicer exemption for all 4,000 mortgage loans.
iii. A nonbank servicer services 4,000 mortgage loans, all of which it originated or owns. The servicer retains a “component servicer” to assist it with servicing functions. The component servicer is not engaged in “servicing” as defined in 12 CFR 1024.2; that is, the component servicer does not receive any scheduled periodic payments from a borrower pursuant to the terms of any mortgage loan, including amounts for escrow accounts, and does not make the payments to the owner of the loan or other third parties of principal and interest and such other payments with respect to the amounts received from the borrower as may be required pursuant to the terms of the mortgage servicing loan documents or servicing contract. The component servicer is not a subservicer pursuant to 12 CFR 1024.31 because it is not engaged in servicing, as that term is defined in 12 CFR 1024.2. The nonbank servicer is a small servicer and, thus, can gain the benefit of the small servicer exemption with regard to all 4,000 mortgage loans it services.
4. **Nonprofit entity that services 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans.** To qualify as a small servicer under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C), a servicer must be a nonprofit entity that services 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, including any mortgage loans serviced on behalf of associated nonprofit entities, for all of which the servicer or an associated nonprofit entity is the creditor. There are two elements to satisfying § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C). First, a nonprofit entity must service 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, including any mortgage loans serviced on behalf of associated nonprofit entities. For each associated nonprofit entity, the small servicer determination is made separately, without consideration of the number of loans serviced by another associated nonprofit entity. Second, a nonprofit entity must service only mortgage loans for which the servicer (or an associated nonprofit entity) is the creditor. To be the creditor, the servicer (or an associated nonprofit entity) must have been the entity to which the mortgage loan obligation was initially payable (that is, the originator of the mortgage loan). A nonprofit entity is not a small servicer under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C) if it services any mortgage loans for which the servicer (or an associated nonprofit entity) is not the creditor (that is, for which the servicer or an associated nonprofit entity was not the originator). The first of the following two examples demonstrates circumstances in which a nonprofit entity would qualify as a small servicer under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C) because it meets both requirements for determining a nonprofit entity's status as a small servicer under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C). The second example demonstrates circumstances in which a nonprofit entity would not qualify as a small servicer under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C) because it does not meet both requirements under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C).
i. Nonprofit entity A services 3,000 of its own mortgage loans, and 1,500 mortgage loans on behalf of associated nonprofit entity B. All 4,500 mortgage loans were originated by A or B. Associated nonprofit entity C services 2,500 mortgage loans, all of which it originated. Because the number of mortgage loans serviced by a nonprofit entity is determined by counting the number of mortgage loans serviced by the nonprofit entity (including mortgage loans serviced on behalf of associated nonprofit entities) but not counting any mortgage loans serviced by an associated nonprofit entity, A and C are both small servicers.
ii. A nonprofit entity services 4,500 mortgage loans - 3,000 mortgage loans it originated, 1,000 mortgage loans originated by associated nonprofit entities, and 500 mortgage loans neither it nor an associated nonprofit entity originated. The nonprofit entity is not a small servicer because it services mortgage loans for which neither it nor an associated nonprofit entity is the creditor, notwithstanding that it services fewer than 5,000 mortgage loans.
[See interpretation of 41(e)(4)(ii) Small servicer defined. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-4-ii-Interp)
**(A)** Services, together with any affiliates, 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, for all of which the servicer (or an affiliate) is the creditor or assignee;
**(B)** Is a Housing Finance Agency, as defined in 24 CFR 266.5; or
**(C)** Is a nonprofit entity that services 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, including any mortgage loans serviced on behalf of associated nonprofit entities, for all of which the servicer or an associated nonprofit entity is the creditor. For purposes of this paragraph (e)(4)(ii)(C), the following definitions apply:
**(1)** The term “nonprofit entity” means an entity having a tax exemption ruling or determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3); 26 CFR 1.501(c)(3)-1), and;
**(2)** The term “associated nonprofit entities” means nonprofit entities that by agreement operate using a common name, trademark, or servicemark to further and support a common charitable mission or purpose.
**(iii) Small servicer determination.** In determining whether a servicer satisfies paragraph (e)(4)(ii)(A) of this section, the servicer is evaluated based on the mortgage loans serviced by the servicer and any affiliates as of January 1 and for the remainder of the calendar year. In determining whether a servicer satisfies paragraph (e)(4)(ii)(C) of this section, the servicer is evaluated based on the mortgage loans serviced by the servicer as of January 1 and for the remainder of the calendar year. A servicer that ceases to qualify as a small servicer will have six months from the time it ceases to qualify or until the next January 1, whichever is later, to comply with any requirements from which the servicer is no longer exempt as a small servicer. The following mortgage loans are not considered in determining whether a servicer qualifies as a small servicer:
Official interpretation of 41(e)(4)(iii) Small servicer determination. 
1. **Loans obtained by merger or acquisition.** Any mortgage loans obtained by a servicer or an affiliate as part of a merger or acquisition, or as part of the acquisition of all of the assets or liabilities of a branch office of a creditor, should be considered mortgage loans for which the servicer or an affiliate is the creditor to which the mortgage loan is initially payable. A branch office means either an office of a depository institution that is approved as a branch by a Federal or State supervisory agency or an office of a for-profit mortgage lending institution (other than a depository institution) that takes applications from the public for mortgage loans.
2. **Timing for small servicer exemption.** The following examples demonstrate when a servicer either is considered or is no longer considered a small servicer under § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(A) and (C):
i. Assume a servicer (that as of January 1 of the current year qualifies as a small servicer) begins servicing more than 5,000 mortgage loans on October 1, and services more than 5,000 mortgage loans as of January 1 of the following year. The servicer would no longer be considered a small servicer on January 1 of the following year and would have to comply with any requirements from which it is no longer exempt as a small servicer on April 1 of the following year.
ii. Assume a servicer (that as of January 1 of the current year qualifies as a small servicer) begins servicing more than 5,000 mortgage loans on February 1, and services more than 5,000 mortgage loans as of January 1 of the following year. The servicer would no longer be considered a small servicer on January 1 of the following year and would have to comply with any requirements from which it is no longer exempt as a small servicer on that same January 1.
iii. Assume a servicer (that as of January 1 of the current year qualifies as a small servicer) begins servicing more than 5,000 mortgage loans on February 1, but services fewer than 5,000 mortgage loans as of January 1 of the following year. The servicer is considered a small servicer for the following year.
3. **Mortgage loans not considered in determining whether a servicer is a small servicer.** Mortgage loans that are not considered pursuant to § 1026.41(e)(4)(iii) in applying § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(A) are not considered either for determining whether a servicer (together with any affiliates) services 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans or whether a servicer is servicing only mortgage loans that it (or an affiliate) owns or originated. For example, assume a servicer services 5,400 mortgage loans. Of these mortgage loans, the servicer owns or originated 4,800 mortgage loans, voluntarily services 300 mortgage loans that neither it (nor an affiliate) owns or originated and for which the servicer does not receive any compensation or fees, and services 300 reverse mortgage transactions. The voluntarily serviced mortgage loans and reverse mortgage loans are not considered in determining whether the servicer qualifies as a small servicer pursuant to § 1026.41(e)(4)(iii)(A). Thus, because only the 4,800 mortgage loans owned or originated by the servicer are considered in determining whether the servicer qualifies as a small servicer, the servicer satisfies § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(A) with regard to all 5,400 mortgage loans it services.
4. **Mortgage loans not considered in determining whether a nonprofit entity is a small servicer.** Mortgage loans that are not considered pursuant to § 1026.41(e)(4)(iii) in applying § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C) are not considered either for determining whether a nonprofit entity services 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, including any mortgage loans serviced on behalf of associated nonprofit entities, or whether a nonprofit entity is servicing only mortgage loans that it or an associated nonprofit entity originated. For example, assume a servicer that is a nonprofit entity services 5,400 mortgage loans. Of these mortgage loans, the nonprofit entity originated 2,800 mortgage loans and associated nonprofit entities originated 2,000 mortgage loans. The nonprofit entity receives compensation for servicing the loans originated by associated nonprofits. The nonprofit entity also voluntarily services 600 mortgage loans that were originated by an entity that is not an associated nonprofit entity, and receives no compensation or fees for servicing these loans. The voluntarily serviced mortgage loans are not considered in determining whether the servicer qualifies as a small servicer. Thus, because only the 4,800 mortgage loans originated by the nonprofit entity or associated nonprofit entities are considered in determining whether the servicer qualifies as a small servicer, the servicer satisfies § 1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C) with regard to all 5,400 mortgage loans it services.
5. **Limited role of voluntarily serviced mortgage loans.** Reverse mortgages and mortgage loans secured by consumers' interests in timeshare plans, in addition to not being considered in determining small servicer qualification, are also exempt from the requirements of § 1026.41. In contrast, although voluntarily serviced mortgage loans, as defined by § 1026.41(e)(4)(iii)(A), are likewise not considered in determining small servicer status, they are not exempt from the requirements of § 1026.41. Thus, a servicer that does not qualify as a small servicer would not have to provide periodic statements for reverse mortgages and timeshare plans because they are exempt from the rule, but would have to provide periodic statements for mortgage loans it voluntarily services.
[See interpretation of 41(e)(4)(iii) Small servicer determination. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-4-iii-Interp)
**(A)** Mortgage loans voluntarily serviced by the servicer for a non-affiliate of the servicer and for which the servicer does not receive any compensation or fees.
**(B)** Reverse mortgage transactions.
**(C)** Mortgage loans secured by consumers' interests in timeshare plans.
**(D)** Transactions serviced by the servicer for a seller financer that meets all of the criteria identified in § [1026.36(a)(5).](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/36/#a-5)
**(5) Certain consumers in bankruptcy** —
Official interpretation of 41(e)(5) Certain consumers in bankruptcy. 
1. **Consumer's representative.** If an agent of the consumer, such as the consumer's bankruptcy counsel, submits a request under § 1026.41(e)(5)(i)(B)(_1_) or (e)(5)(ii), the request is deemed to be submitted by the consumer.
2. **Multiple requests.** A consumer's most recent written request under § 1026.41(e)(5)(i)(B)(_1_) or (e)(5)(ii) that the servicer cease or continue, as applicable, providing a periodic statement or coupon book determines whether the exemption in § 1026.41(e)(5)(i) applies.
3. **Effective upon receipt.** A consumer's written request under § 1026.41(e)(5)(i)(B)(_1_) or (e)(5)(ii) is effective as of the date of receipt by the servicer.
4. **Bankruptcy case revived.** If a consumer's bankruptcy case is revived, for example, if the court reinstates a previously dismissed case or reopens a case, § 1026.41(e)(5) may apply again, including the timing requirements in § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv).
[See interpretation of 41(e)(5) Certain consumers in bankruptcy. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-5-Interp)
**(i) Exemption.** Except as provided in paragraph (e)(5)(ii) of this section, a servicer is exempt from the requirements of this section with regard to a mortgage loan if:
Official interpretation of 41(e)(5)(i) Exemption. 
1. **Multiple obligors.** When two or more consumers are joint obligors with primary liability on a mortgage loan subject to § 1026.41, § 1026.41(e)(5)(i) applies if any one of the consumers meets its criteria. For example, assume that two spouses jointly own a home and are primary obligors on the mortgage loan. One spouse files for chapter 13 bankruptcy and has a bankruptcy plan that provides for surrendering the dwelling that secures the mortgage loan. In part, § 1026.41(e)(5)(i) exempts the servicer from providing a periodic statement with regard to that mortgage loan, unless one of the spouses requests in writing that the servicer provide a periodic statement or coupon book pursuant to § 1026.41(e)(5)(ii). If either spouse, including the one who is not a debtor in bankruptcy, submits a written request to receive a periodic statement or coupon book, the servicer must provide a periodic statement or coupon book for that mortgage loan account.
[See interpretation of 41(e)(5)(i) Exemption. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-5-i-Interp)
**(A)** Any consumer on the mortgage loan is a debtor in bankruptcy under title 11 of the United States Code or has discharged personal liability for the mortgage loan pursuant to 11 U.S.C. 727, 1141, 1228, or 1328; and
**(B)** With regard to any consumer on the mortgage loan:
**(1)** The consumer requests in writing that the servicer cease providing a periodic statement or coupon book;
**(2)** The consumer's bankruptcy plan provides that the consumer will surrender the dwelling securing the mortgage loan, provides for the avoidance of the lien securing the mortgage loan, or otherwise does not provide for, as applicable, the payment of pre-bankruptcy arrearage or the maintenance of payments due under the mortgage loan;
Official interpretation of Paragraph 41(e)(5)(i)(B)(2). 
1. **Bankruptcy plan.** For purposes of § 1026.41(e)(5)(i)(B)(_2_), bankruptcy plan refers to the consumer's most recently filed bankruptcy plan under the applicable provisions of title 11 of the United States Code, regardless of whether the court overseeing the consumer's bankruptcy case has confirmed or approved the plan.
[See interpretation of Paragraph 41(e)(5)(i)(B)(2). in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-5-i-B-2-Interp)
**(3)** A court enters an order in the bankruptcy case providing for the avoidance of the lien securing the mortgage loan, lifting the automatic stay pursuant to 11 U.S.C. 362 with regard to the dwelling securing the mortgage loan, or requiring the servicer to cease providing a periodic statement or coupon book; or
**(4)** The consumer files with the court overseeing the bankruptcy case a statement of intention pursuant to 11 U.S.C. 521(a) identifying an intent to surrender the dwelling securing the mortgage loan and a consumer has not made any partial or periodic payment on the mortgage loan after the commencement of the consumer's bankruptcy case.
Official interpretation of Paragraph 41(e)(5)(i)(B)(4). 
1. **Statement of intention.** For purposes of § 1026.41(e)(5)(i)(B)(_4_), the statement of intention refers to the consumer's most recently filed statement of intention. For example, if a consumer files a statement of intention on June 1 identifying an intent to surrender the dwelling securing the mortgage loan but files an amended statement of intention on June 15 identifying an intent to retain the dwelling, the consumer's June 15 statement of intention is the relevant filing for purposes of § 1026.41(e)(5)(i)(B)(_4_).
[See interpretation of Paragraph 41(e)(5)(i)(B)(4). in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-5-i-B-4-Interp)
**(ii) Reaffirmation or consumer request to receive statement or coupon book.** A servicer ceases to qualify for an exemption pursuant to paragraph (e)(5)(i) of this section with respect to a mortgage loan if the consumer reaffirms personal liability for the loan or any consumer on the loan requests in writing that the servicer provide a periodic statement or coupon book, unless a court enters an order in the bankruptcy case requiring the servicer to cease providing a periodic statement or coupon book.
Official interpretation of 41(e)(5)(ii) Reaffirmation or consumer request to receive statement or coupon book. 
1. **Form of periodic statement or coupon book.** Section 1026.41(e)(5)(ii) generally requires a servicer, notwithstanding § 1026.41(e)(5)(i), to resume providing a periodic statement or coupon book if the consumer in bankruptcy reaffirms personal liability for the mortgage loan or any consumer on the mortgage loan requests in writing that the servicer provide a periodic statement or coupon book. Whether a servicer provides a periodic statement or coupon book as modified by § 1026.41(f) or an unmodified periodic statement or coupon book depends on whether or not § 1026.41(f) applies to that mortgage loan at that time. For example, § 1026.41(f) does not apply with respect to a mortgage loan once the consumer has reaffirmed personal liability; therefore, following a consumer's reaffirmation, a servicer generally would provide a periodic statement or coupon book that complies with § 1026.41 but without the modifications set forth in § 1026.41(f). _See_ comment 41(f)-6. Section 1026.41(f) does apply, however, with respect to a mortgage loan following a consumer's written request to receive a periodic statement or coupon book, so long as any consumer on the mortgage loan remains in bankruptcy or has discharged personal liability for the mortgage loan; accordingly, following that written request, a servicer must provide a periodic statement or coupon book that includes the modifications set forth in § 1026.41(f).
[See interpretation of 41(e)(5)(ii) Reaffirmation or consumer request to receive statement or coupon book. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-5-ii-Interp)
**(iii) Exclusive address.** A servicer may establish an address that a consumer must use to submit a written request under paragraph (e)(5)(i)(B)(_1_) or (e)(5)(ii) of this section, provided that the servicer notifies the consumer of the address in a manner that is reasonably designed to inform the consumer of the address. If a servicer designates a specific address for requests under paragraph (e)(5)(i)(B)(_1_) or (e)(5)(ii) of this section, the servicer shall designate the same address for purposes of both paragraphs (e)(5)(i)(B)(_1_) and (e)(5)(ii) of this section.
**(iv) Timing of compliance following transition** —
Official interpretation of 41(e)(5)(iv) Timing of compliance following transition. 
[See interpretation of 41(e)(5)(iv) Timing of compliance following transition. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-5-iv-Interp)
**(A) Triggering events for transitioning to modified and unmodified periodic statements.** A servicer transitions to providing a periodic statement or coupon book with the modifications set forth in paragraph (f) of this section or to providing a periodic statement or coupon book without such modifications when one of the following three events occurs:
Official interpretation of 41(e)(5)(iv)(A) Triggering events for transitioning to modified and unmodified periodic statements. 
1. **Section 1026.41(f) becomes applicable or ceases to apply.** Section 1026.41(e)(5)(iv) sets forth the time period in which a servicer must provide a periodic statement or coupon book for the first time after a mortgage loan either becomes subject to the requirements of § 1026.41(f) or ceases to be subject to the requirements of § 1026.41(f). A mortgage loan becomes subject to the requirements of § 1026.41(f) when, for example, any consumer on the mortgage loan becomes a debtor in bankruptcy or discharges personal liability for the mortgage loan. A mortgage loan may cease to be subject to the requirements of § 1026.41(f) when, for example, the consumer in bankruptcy reaffirms personal liability for a mortgage loan or the consumer's bankruptcy case is closed or dismissed without the consumer having discharged personal liability for the mortgage loan. _See_ comment 41(f)-6.
2. **Servicer ceases to qualify for an exemption.** Section 1026.41(e)(5)(iv) sets forth the time period in which a servicer must provide a periodic statement or coupon book for the first time after a servicer ceases to qualify for an exemption pursuant to § 1026.41(e)(5)(i) with respect to a mortgage loan. A servicer ceases to qualify for an exemption pursuant to § 1026.41(e)(5)(i) with respect to a mortgage loan when, for example:
i. The consumer's bankruptcy case is dismissed or closed without the consumer having discharged personal liability for the mortgage loan;
ii. The consumer files an amended bankruptcy plan or statement of intention that provides, as applicable, for the maintenance of payments due under the mortgage loan and the payment of pre-petition arrearage or that the consumer will retain the dwelling securing the mortgage loan;
iii. A consumer makes a partial or periodic payment on the mortgage loan despite the consumer in bankruptcy having filed a statement of intention identifying an intent to surrender the dwelling securing the mortgage loan, thus making § 1026.41(e)(5)(i)(B)(**4**) inapplicable;
iv. The consumer in bankruptcy reaffirms personal liability for the mortgage loan; or
v. The consumer submits a written request pursuant to § 1026.41(e)(ii) that the servicer resume providing a periodic statement or coupon book.
[See interpretation of 41(e)(5)(iv)(A) Triggering events for transitioning to modified and unmodified periodic statements. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-5-iv-A-Interp)
**(1)** A mortgage loan becomes subject to the requirements of paragraph (f) of this section;
**(2)** A mortgage loan ceases to be subject to the requirements of paragraph (f) of this section; or
**(3)** A servicer ceases to qualify for an exemption pursuant to paragraph (e)(5)(i) of this section with respect to a mortgage loan.
**(B) Single-statement exemption.** As of the date on which one of the events listed in paragraph (e)(5)(iv)(A) of this section occurs, a servicer is exempt from the requirements of this section with respect to the next periodic statement or coupon book that would otherwise be required but thereafter must provide modified or unmodified periodic statements or coupon books that comply with the requirements of this section.
Official interpretation of 41(e)(5)(iv)(B) Single-Statement Exemption. 
1. **Timing.** The exemption in § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv)(B) applies with respect to a single periodic statement or coupon book following an event listed in § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv)(A). For example, assume that a mortgage loan has a monthly billing cycle, each payment due date is on the first day of the month following its respective billing cycle, and each payment due date has a 15-day courtesy period. In this scenario:
i. If an event listed in § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv)(A) occurs on October 6, before the end of the 15-day courtesy period provided for the October 1 payment due date, and the servicer has not yet provided a periodic statement or coupon book for the billing cycle with a November 1 payment due date, the servicer is exempt from providing a periodic statement or coupon book for that billing cycle. The servicer is required thereafter to resume providing periodic statements or coupon books that comply with the requirements of § 1026.41 by providing a modified or unmodified periodic statement or coupon book for the billing cycle with a December 1 payment due date within a reasonably prompt time after November 1 or the end of the 15-day courtesy period provided for the November 1 payment due date. **See** § 1026.41(b).
ii. If an event listed in § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv)(A) occurs on October 20, after the end of the 15-day courtesy period provided for the October 1 payment due date, and the servicer timely provided a periodic statement or coupon book for the billing cycle with the November 1 payment due date, the servicer is not required to correct the periodic statement or coupon book already provided and is exempt from providing the next periodic statement or coupon book, which is the one that would otherwise be required for the billing cycle with a December 1 payment due date. The servicer is required thereafter to resume providing periodic statements or coupon books that comply with the requirements of § 1026.41 by providing a modified or unmodified periodic statement or coupon book for the billing cycle with a January 1 payment due date within a reasonably prompt time after December 1 or the end of the 15-day courtesy period provided for the December 1 payment due date. **See** § 1026.41(b).
2. **Duplicate coupon books not required.** If a servicer provides a coupon book instead of a periodic statement under § 1026.41(e)(3), § 1026.41 requires the servicer to provide a new coupon book after one of the events listed in § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv)(A) occurs only to the extent the servicer has not previously provided the consumer with a coupon book that covers the upcoming billing cycle.
3. **Subsequent triggering events.** The single-statement exemption in § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv)(B) might apply more than once over the life of a loan. For example, assume the exemption applies beginning on April 14 because the consumer files for bankruptcy on that date and the bankruptcy plan provides that the consumer will surrender the dwelling, such that the mortgage loan becomes subject to the requirements of § 1026.41(f). _See_ § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv)(A)(_1_). If the consumer later exits bankruptcy on November 2 and has not discharged personal liability for the mortgage loan pursuant to 11 U.S.C. 727, 1141, 1228, or 1328, such that the mortgage loan ceases to be subject to the requirements of § 1026.41(f), the single-statement exemption would apply again beginning on November 2. _See_ § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv)(A)(_2_).
[See interpretation of 41(e)(5)(iv)(B) Single-Statement Exemption. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-5-iv-B-Interp)
**(6) Charged-off loans.**
Official interpretation of 41(e)(6) Charged-off loans. 
1. **Change in ownership.** If a charged-off mortgage loan is subsequently purchased, assigned, or transferred, § 1026.39(b) requires a covered person, as defined in § 1026.39(a)(1), to provide mortgage transfer disclosures. _See_ § 1026.39.
2. **Change in servicing.** A servicer may take advantage of the exemption in § 1026.41(e)(6)(i), subject to the requirements of that paragraph, and may rely on a prior servicer's provision to the consumer of a periodic statement pursuant to § 1026.41(e)(6)(i)(B) unless the servicer provided the consumer a periodic statement pursuant to § 1026.41(a).
[See interpretation of 41(e)(6) Charged-off loans. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-6-Interp)
**(i)** A servicer is exempt from the requirements of this section for a mortgage loan if the servicer:
**(A)** Has charged off the loan in accordance with loan-loss provisions and will not charge any additional fees or interest on the account; and
**(B)** Provides, within 30 days of charge-off or the most recent periodic statement, a periodic statement, clearly and conspicuously labeled “Suspension of Statements & Notice of Charge Off - Retain This Copy for Your Records.” The periodic statement must clearly and conspicuously explain that, as applicable, the mortgage loan has been charged off and the servicer will not charge any additional fees or interest on the account; the servicer will no longer provide the consumer a periodic statement for each billing cycle; the lien on the property remains in place and the consumer remains liable for the mortgage loan obligation and any obligations arising from or related to the property, which may include property taxes; the consumer may be required to pay the balance on the account in the future, for example, upon sale of the property; the balance on the account is not being canceled or forgiven; and the loan may be purchased, assigned, or transferred.
Official interpretation of Paragraph 41(e)(6)(i)(B). 
1. **Clearly and conspicuously.** Section 1026.41(e)(6)(i)(B) requires that the periodic statement be clearly and conspicuously labeled “Suspension of Statements & Notice of Charge Off - Retain This Copy for Your Records” and that it clearly and conspicuously provide certain explanations to the consumer, as applicable, but no minimum type size or other technical requirements are imposed. The clear and conspicuous standard generally requires that disclosures be in a reasonably understandable form and readily noticeable to the consumer. _See_ comment 41(c)-1.
[See interpretation of Paragraph 41(e)(6)(i)(B). in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-e-6-i-B-Interp)
**(ii) Resuming compliance.**
**(A)** If a servicer fails at any time to treat a mortgage loan that is exempt under paragraph (e)(6)(i) of this section as charged off or charges any additional fees or interest on the account, the obligation to provide a periodic statement pursuant to this section resumes.
**(B) Prohibition on retroactive fees.** A servicer may not retroactively assess fees or interest on the account for the period of time during which the exemption in paragraph (e)(6)(i) of this section applied.
**(f) Modified periodic statements and coupon books for certain consumers in bankruptcy.** While any consumer on a mortgage loan is a debtor in bankruptcy under title 11 of the United States Code, or if such consumer has discharged personal liability for the mortgage loan pursuant to 11 U.S.C. 727, 1141, 1228, or 1328, the requirements of this section are subject to the following modifications with regard to that mortgage loan:
Official interpretation of 41(f) Modified periodic statements and coupon books for certain consumers in bankruptcy. 
1. **Compliance after the bankruptcy case ends.** Except as provided in § 1026.41(e)(5), § 1026.41(f) applies with regard to a mortgage loan for which any consumer with primary liability is a debtor in a case under title 11 of the United States Code. After the debtor exits bankruptcy, § 1026.41(f) continues to apply if the consumer has discharged personal liability for the mortgage loan, but § 1026.41(f) does not apply if the consumer has reaffirmed personal liability for the mortgage loan or otherwise has not discharged personal liability for the mortgage loan.
2. **Terminology.** With regard to a periodic statement provided under § 1026.41(f), a servicer may use terminology other than that found on the sample periodic statements in appendix H-30, so long as the new terminology is commonly understood. _See_ comment 41(d)-3. For example, a servicer may take into account terminology appropriate for consumers in bankruptcy and refer to the “amount due” identified in § 1026.41(d)(1), as the “payment amount.” Similarly, a servicer may refer to an amount past due identified in § 1026.41(d)(2)(iii) as “past unpaid amount.” Additionally, a servicer may refer to the delinquency information required by § 1026.41(d)(8) as an “account history,” and to the amount needed to bring the loan current, referred to in § 1026.41(d)(8)(vi) as “the total payment amount needed to bring the account current,” as “unpaid amount.”
3. **Other periodic statement requirements continue to apply.** The requirements of § 1026.41, including the content and layout requirements of § 1026.41(d), apply unless modified expressly by § 1026.41(e)(5) or (f). For example, the requirement under § 1026.41(d)(3) to disclose a past payment breakdown applies without modification with respect to a periodic statement provided to a consumer in bankruptcy.
4. **Further modifications.** A periodic statement or coupon book provided under § 1026.41(f) may be modified as necessary to facilitate compliance with title 11 of the United States Code, the Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure, court orders, and local rules, guidelines, and standing orders. For example, a periodic statement or coupon book may include additional disclosures or disclaimers not required under § 1026.41(f) but that are related to the consumer's status as a debtor in bankruptcy or that advise the consumer how to submit a written request under § 1026.41(e)(5)(i)(B)(_1_). _See_ comment 41(f)(3)-1.ii for a discussion of the treatment of a bankruptcy plan that modifies the terms of the mortgage loan, such as by reducing the outstanding balance of the mortgage loan or altering the applicable interest rate.
5. **Commencing compliance.** A servicer must begin to provide a periodic statement or coupon book that complies with paragraph (f) of this section within the timeframe set forth in § 1026.41(e)(5)(iv).
6. **Reaffirmation.** For purposes of § 1026.41(f), a consumer who has reaffirmed personal liability for a mortgage loan is not considered to be a debtor in bankruptcy.
[See interpretation of 41(f) Modified periodic statements and coupon books for certain consumers in bankruptcy. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-f-Interp)
**(1) Requirements not applicable.** The periodic statement may omit the information set forth in paragraphs (d)(1)(ii) and (d)(8)(i), (ii), and (v) of this section. The requirement in paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section that the amount due must be shown more prominently than other disclosures on the page shall not apply.
**(2) Bankruptcy notices.** The periodic statement must include the following:
**(i)** A statement identifying the consumer's status as a debtor in bankruptcy or the discharged status of the mortgage loan; and
**(ii)** A statement that the periodic statement is for informational purposes only.
**(3) Chapter 12 and chapter 13 consumers.** In addition to any other provisions of this paragraph (f) that may apply, with regard to a mortgage loan for which any consumer with primary liability is a debtor in a chapter 12 or chapter 13 bankruptcy case, the requirements of this section are subject to the following modifications:
Official interpretation of 41(f)(3) Chapter 12 and chapter 13 consumers. 
1. **Pre-petition payments and post-petition payments.** i. For purposes of § 1026.41(f)(3), pre-petition payments are payments made to cure the consumer's pre-bankruptcy defaults, and post-petition payments are payments made to satisfy the mortgage loan's periodic payments as they come due after the bankruptcy case is filed. For example, assume a consumer is $3,600 in arrears as of the bankruptcy filing date on a mortgage loan requiring monthly periodic payments of $2,000. The consumer's most recently filed bankruptcy plan requires the consumer to make payments of $100 each month for 36 months to pay the pre-bankruptcy arrearage, and $2,000 each month to satisfy the monthly periodic payments. Assuming the consumer makes the payments according to the plan, the $100 payments are the pre-petition payments and the $2,000 payments are the post-petition payments for purposes of the disclosures required under § 1026.41(f)(3).
ii. If a consumer is a debtor in a case under chapter 12 or if a consumer's bankruptcy plan modifies the terms of the mortgage loan, such as by reducing the outstanding balance of the mortgage loan or altering the applicable interest rate, the disclosures under § 1026.41(d)(1) and (2) and (f)(3)(ii) and (iii) may disclose either the amount payable under the original terms of the mortgage loan, the amount payable under the remaining secured portion of the adjusted mortgage loan, or a statement that the consumer should contact the trustee or the consumer's attorney with any questions about the amount payable. In such cases, the remaining disclosures under § 1026.41(d) or (f)(3), as applicable, may be limited to how payments are applied to the remaining secured portion of the adjusted mortgage loan.
2. **Post-petition fees and charges.** For purposes of § 1026.41(f)(3), post-petition fees and charges are those fees and charges imposed after the bankruptcy case is filed. To the extent that the court overseeing the consumer's bankruptcy case requires such fees and charges to be included as an amendment to a servicer's proof of claim, a servicer may include such fees and charges in the balance of the pre-petition arrearage under § 1026.41(f)(3)(v)(C) rather than treating them as post-petition fees and charges for purposes of § 1026.41(f)(3).
3. **First statement after exemption terminates.** Section § 1026.41(f)(3)(iii) through (v) requires, in part, the disclosure of certain information regarding account activity that has occurred since the last statement. For purposes of the first periodic statement provided to the consumer following termination of an exemption under § 1026.41(e), those disclosures regarding account activity that has occurred since the last statement may be limited to account activity since the last payment due date that occurred while the exemption was in effect. _See_ comment 41(d)-5.
[See interpretation of 41(f)(3) Chapter 12 and chapter 13 consumers. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-f-3-Interp)
**(i) Requirements not applicable.** In addition to omitting the information set forth in paragraph (f)(1) of this section, the periodic statement may also omit the information set forth in paragraphs (d)(8)(iii), (iv), (vi), and (vii) of this section.
**(ii) Amount due.** The amount due information set forth in paragraph (d)(1) of this section may be limited to the date and amount of the post-petition payments due and any post-petition fees and charges imposed by the servicer.
Official interpretation of 41(f)(3)(ii) Amount due. 
1. **Amount due.** The amount due under § 1026.41(d)(1) is not required to include any amounts other than post-petition payments the consumer is required to make under the terms of a bankruptcy plan, including any past due post-petition payments, and post-petition fees and charges that a servicer has imposed. The servicer is not required to include in the amount due any pre-petition payments due under a bankruptcy plan or other amounts payable pursuant to a court order. The servicer is not required to include in the amount due any post-petition fees and charges that the servicer has not imposed. A servicer that defers collecting a fee or charge until after complying with the Federal Rule of Bankruptcy Procedure 3002.1 procedures, and thus after a potential court determination on whether the fee or charge is allowed, is not required to disclose the fee or charge until complying with such procedures. However, a servicer may include in the amount due other amounts due to the servicer that are not post-petition payments or fees or charges, such as amounts due under an agreed order, provided those other amounts are also disclosed in the explanation of amount due and transaction activity.
[See interpretation of 41(f)(3)(ii) Amount due. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-f-3-ii-Interp)
**(iii) Explanation of amount due.** The explanation of amount due information set forth in paragraph (d)(2) of this section may be limited to:
Official interpretation of 41(f)(3)(iii) Explanation of amount due. 
1. **Explanation of amount due.** The explanation of amount due under § 1026.41(d)(2) is not required to include any amounts other than the post-petition payments, including the amount of any past due post-petition payments and post-petition fees and charges that a servicer has imposed. Consistent with § 1026.41(d)(3)(i), the post-petition payments must be broken down by the amount, if any, that will be applied to principal, interest, and escrow. The servicer is not required to disclose, as part of the explanation of amount due, any pre-petition payments or the amount of the consumer's pre-bankruptcy arrearage. However, a servicer may identify other amounts due to the servicer provided those amounts are also disclosed in the amount due and transaction activity. _See_ comment 41(d)-4.
[See interpretation of 41(f)(3)(iii) Explanation of amount due. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-f-3-iii-Interp)
**(A)** The monthly post-petition payment amount, including a breakdown showing how much, if any, will be applied to principal, interest, and escrow;
**(B)** The total sum of any post-petition fees or charges imposed since the last statement; and
**(C)** Any post-petition payment amount past due.
**(iv) Transaction activity.** The transaction activity information set forth in paragraph (d)(4) of this section must include all payments the servicer has received since the last statement, including all post-petition and pre-petition payments and payments of post-petition fees and charges, and all post-petition fees and charges the servicer has imposed since the last statement. The brief description of the activity need not identify the source of any payments.
**(v) Pre-petition arrearage.** If applicable, a servicer must disclose, grouped in close proximity to each other and located on the first page of the statement or, alternatively, on a separate page enclosed with the periodic statement or in a separate letter:
Official interpretation of 41(f)(3)(v) Pre-petition arrearage. 
1. **Pre-petition arrearage.** If the pre-petition arrearage is subject to dispute, or has not yet been determined by the servicer, the periodic statement may include a statement acknowledging the unresolved amount of the pre-petition arrearage. A servicer may omit the information required by § 1026.41(f)(3)(v) from the periodic statement until such time as the servicer has had a reasonable opportunity to determine the amount of the pre-petition arrearage. The servicer may not omit the information required by § 1026.41(f)(3)(v) from the periodic statement after the date that the bankruptcy court has fixed for filing proofs of claim in the consumer's bankruptcy case.
[See interpretation of 41(f)(3)(v) Pre-petition arrearage. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-f-3-v-Interp)
**(A)** The total of all pre-petition payments received since the last statement;
**(B)** The total of all pre-petition payments received since the beginning of the consumer's bankruptcy case; and
**(C)** The current balance of the consumer's pre-petition arrearage.
**(vi) Additional disclosures.** The periodic statement must include, as applicable:
**(A)** A statement that the amount due includes only post-petition payments and does not include other payments that may be due under the terms of the consumer's bankruptcy plan;
**(B)** If the consumer's bankruptcy plan requires the consumer to make the post-petition mortgage payments directly to a bankruptcy trustee, a statement that the consumer should send the payment to the trustee and not to the servicer;
**(C)** A statement that the information disclosed on the periodic statement may not include payments the consumer has made to the trustee and may not be consistent with the trustee's records;
**(D)** A statement that encourages the consumer to contact the consumer's attorney or the trustee with questions regarding the application of payments; and
**(E)** If the consumer is more than 45 days delinquent on post-petition payments, a statement that the servicer has not received all the payments that became due since the consumer filed for bankruptcy.
**(4) Multiple obligors.** If this paragraph (f) applies in connection with a mortgage loan with more than one primary obligor, the servicer may provide the modified statement to any or all of the primary obligors, even if a primary obligor to whom the servicer provides the modified statement is not a debtor in bankruptcy.
Official interpretation of 41(f)(4) Multiple obligors. 
1. **Modified statements.** When two or more consumers are joint obligors with primary liability on a mortgage loan subject to § 1026.41, a servicer may send the periodic statement to any one of the primary obligors. _See_ comment 41(a)-1. Section 1026.41(f)(4) provides that a servicer may provide a modified statement under § 1026.41(f), if applicable, to any or all of the primary obligors, even if a primary obligor to whom the servicer provides the modified statement is not a debtor in bankruptcy. The servicer need not provide an unmodified statement to any of the primary obligors. For example, assume that two spouses jointly own a home and are both primarily liable on the mortgage loan. One spouse files for chapter 13 bankruptcy, and that spouse's chapter 13 bankruptcy plan provides that the same spouse will retain the home by making pre-petition and post-petition payments. The servicer complies with § 1026.41 by providing the modified periodic statement under § 1026.41(f) to either spouse.
2. **Obligors in different chapters of bankruptcy.** If two or more consumers are joint obligors with primary liability on a mortgage loan subject to § 1026.41 and are debtors under different chapters of bankruptcy, only one of which is subject to § 1026.41(f)(3), a servicer may, but need not, include the modifications set forth in § 1026.41(f)(3). For example, assume one joint obligor is a debtor in a case under chapter 7 and another joint obligor is a debtor in a case under chapter 13, and that the servicer is not exempt from the periodic statement requirement under § 1026.41(e)(5). The periodic statement or coupon book is subject to the modifications set forth in § 1026.41(f)(1) and (2), but the servicer may determine whether it is appropriate to include the modifications set forth in § 1026.41(f)(3).
[See interpretation of 41(f)(4) Multiple obligors. in Supplement I](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/interp-41/#41-f-4-Interp)
**(5) Coupon books.** A servicer that provides a coupon book instead of a periodic statement under paragraph (e)(3) of this section must include in the coupon book the disclosures set forth in paragraphs (f)(2) and (f)(3)(vi) of this section, as applicable. The servicer may include these disclosures anywhere in the coupon book provided to the consumer or on a separate page enclosed with the coupon book. The servicer must make available upon request to the consumer by telephone, in writing, in person, or electronically, if the consumer consents, the information listed in paragraph (f)(3)(v) of this section, as applicable. The modifications set forth in paragraphs (f)(1) and (f)(3)(i) through (iv) and (vi) of this section apply to a coupon book and other information a servicer provides to the consumer under paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
**(g) Successor in interest.** If, upon confirmation, a servicer provides a confirmed successor in interest who is not liable on the mortgage loan obligation with a written notice and acknowledgment form in accordance with Regulation X, § [1024.32(c)(1)](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/32/#c-1) of this chapter, the servicer is not required to provide to the confirmed successor in interest any written disclosure required by this section unless and until the confirmed successor in interest either assumes the mortgage loan obligation under State law or has provided the servicer an executed acknowledgment in accordance with Regulation X, § [1024.32(c)(1)(iv)](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1024/32/#c-1-iv) of this chapter, that the confirmed successor in interest has not revoked.
  * [ Previous section - § 1026.40 ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/40/) § 1026.40 Requirements for home equity plans.
  * [ Next section - § 1026.42 ](https://www.consumerfinance.gov/rules-policy/regulations/1026/42/) § 1026.42 Valuation independence.